BACKGROUND:

This program is based on an article by Martyn Fogg in the Journal of
the British Interplanetary Society (JBIS) called 'Extrasolar Planetary
Systems: a Microcomputer Simulation'.  The article describes how he
implemented a program to generate various sun-like solar systems.
Since he did a good job of listing references, I recreated the program
in C, and the result is what you see in front of you.


CREATING THE STARFORM EXECUTABLE FILE:

Because of my need to run this on an IBM-PC, I have included makefiles
for two popular MS-DOS compilers (Microsoft C and Turbo C) as well as
a makefile for a normal Unix machine.  These are used as follows:

Compiling under Unix:
        make

Compiling under MS-DOS (with Turbo C):
        make -fmakefile.tc

Compiling under MS-DOS (with Microsoft C):
        make makefile.msc


RUNNING THE STARFORM EXECUTABLE:

The starform program has four command-line arguments:

        -m      Build moons.
                This flag will cause moons to be generated for every
                planet.  The moon accretion algorithm is the same as
                that used for accreting dust and gas for planets.
                Since the majority of computation time in starform is
                spent in the accretion process, using the -m flag will
                increase program runtime correspondingly.  Be prepared
                to do something else for a while if you use this flag
                on a slow machine!

        -s#     Initialize the random-number generator.
                This flag initializes the random-number generator to
                the integer provided directly following the '-s'.
                This is useful when controlling which star system is
                generated, and may be used to ensure that no repeat
                star systems are produced.

        -v#     Set verbosity level.
                This may be used to examine (at varying levels of
                detail) what the program is currently calculating.  At
                this release, there are three levels of verbosity.

                0       The default.  Don't display any extra information -
                        just the results.
                1       Display planetary accretion information while
                        building the planets.
                2       Display protoplanet accretion information while
                        building the moons.

       -tl#l/# Specify stellar info.
             Specifying stellar info allows the user to indicate what
             spectral class and luminosity type the central star
             should be in the format "l#l", which indicates that a
             letter (spectral type), number (spectral type modifier),
             letter (luminosity class), and a slash followed by a
             number (AU's from the primary) are needed to fully
             describe the star.  Possible letters for the spectral
             type are below:

                        O       Hot blue stars ( greater than 25,000K)
                        B       Hot blue stars (11,000 - 25,000K)
                        A       Blue stars (7,500 - 11,000K)
                        F       Blue-white stars (6,000 - 7,500K)
                        G       Yellow-white stars (5,000 - 6,000K)
                        K       Orange-red stars (3,500 - 5,000K)
                        M       Red stars (less than 3,500K)

             Each spectral class star is further described by a
             modifier consisting of a number from 0 - 9, breaking each
             letter classification into tenths.  The sequence for
             spectral class G (sun-like) stars are, in order of
             decreasing temperature: G0, G1,...  , G9, K0,...

             Although most (90%) of stars in our neighborhood are main
             sequence stars, about 10% are white dwarfs and less than
             1% are giants or supergiants.  The size of the star is
             known as the luminosity class:

        Usual     Starform
        code     designation
        __________________
          V           M    Main sequence  Normal hydrogen-burning stars.
        III           G    Giant          Cool, high luminosity stars.
         Ia           S    Supergiant     Cool, even higher luminosity stars.
          D           D    White dwarf    Hot, dense, and planet-sized.

             There are several luminosity classes not represented in
             Starform.  For completeness, they are:

                    Ib   Less luminous supergiants.
                    II   Bright giants.
                    IV   Subgiants (between giants and main-sequence).

             The final number, separated from the others by a slash,
             indicates this star's distance from the primary in units
             of AU's (an abbreviation for Astronomical Units - a
             common unit of astrophysical measure: the distance from
             the Earth to the Sun).



EXAMPLES OF USE:

To generate a system resembling Earth's (a normal system with moons
about the planets, a main-sequence G3 primary, and no companion
stars):

    starform -m -tG3M/0

To generate a completely random system with no moons:

    starform

To generate a system resembling Alpha Centauri (a G2 primary (Alpha)
with a dwarf K1 companion star (Beta) at 23 AU distance from Alpha):

    starform -m -tG2M/0 -tK1D/23

Actually, Beta Centauri lies in an orbit of eccentricity 0.52 about
Alpha Centauri (meaning its orbit ranges anywhere from 11 to 35 AU
from Alpha), but for now we'll assume the eccentricity of companion
stars is zero.


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS:

As a warning, don't be surprised if the program take a while to run.
It's been a while since I've updated the timings here for newer
machines, but here are some sample run times when moons are not built:

        1.4 seconds on a Sun-4/390
        2-5 seconds user time on an HP9000/350
        5-30 seconds on a Sun-3/60
        5-8 seconds on an 8087-equipped 10MHz IBM-XT
        4 minutes on an 8 MHz IBM-PC
        7 minutes on a normal IBM-PC



Now for some references.  These are not the only good references on this
subject; only the most interesting of many that were listed in Fogg's
article in vol 38 of JBIS:

For a good description of the entire program:

    "Extra-Solar Planetary Systems: A Microcomputer Simulation"
    Martyn J. Fogg,  Journal of the British Interplanetary Society
    Vol 38, pp. 501 - 514, 1985

For the surface temperature/albedo iterative loop:

    "The Evolution of the Atmosphere of the Earth"
    Michael H. Hart, Icarus, Vol 33, pp. 23 - 39, 1978

For the determination of the radius of a terrestrial planet:

    "The Internal Constitution of the Planets"
    D. S. Kothari, Ph.D. , Mon. Not. Roy. Astr. Soc.
    Vol 96, pp. 833 - 843, 1936

For the planetary mass accretion algorithm:

    "Formation of Planetary Systems by Aggregation: A Computer Simulation"
    S. H. Dole, RAND paper no. P-4226, 1969

For the length of day calculation:

    "Q in the Solar System"
    P. Goldreich and S. Soter, Icarus, Vol 5, pp. 375 - 389, 1966



Thanks to many people on Usenet for their help in debugging, testing,
and adding features to this program.

Enjoy, and if you find any glaring inconsistancies or interesting
pieces to add to the simulation, let me know and I'll include it in
any other distributions I send out.

Snail Mail:
    Matt Burdick
    Hewlett-Packard, MS6U0
    1501 Page Mill Rd
    Palo Alto, CA

Email:
    burdick@hpspd.spd.hp.com


SAMPLE OUTPUT:

Here is a sample of how starform would describe the Sun and Earth:

